# Sampling design and estimates of observation error greatly reduce quasi-extinction probability in plant populations
JAGS code from Miranda-Cebrián, H., Doak, D.F. and García, M.B. (2025). Sampling design and estimates of observation error greatly reduce quasi-extinction probability in plant populations. Biological Conservation. 306, 111141. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2025.111141)

## Abstract
Estimates of population dynamics and risk of extinction are sensitive to both mean rates of annual change and also the variation in these rates caused by environmental stochasticity. The analytical machinery to incorporate the latter into estimates of long-term stochastic growth and quasi-extinction risk are well developed for count-based population data. However, analytical methods rarely account for the effects of observation error during the sampling process, which can inflate apparent stochasticity and thus alter estimates of population behavior. Here, we applied a Bayesian stochastic population model to estimate the growth rates and quasi-extinction risk of over 157 plant populations monitored through a collaborative science program in NE Spain, and calculated the effect of incorporating direct measures of the observation error into our estimates. We found that including the observation error into models reduced the estimated temporal variation of all populations, which in turn resulted in modest increases in estimated long-term growth rates but considerable reductions in quasi-extinction risk. In this study we show how adjusting sampling designs to the size, detectability and density of plant populations, and repeating surveys in one or more years substantially improves estimates of population growth and viability, thus contributing to guide a better conservation practice.

## Background
The paper describes a general model to estimate average population growth rates and their interannual variance when we have repeated surveys for some years. This model allows for missing years in the time series as well as in the repeated surveys. As a benchmark comparison, we compared our model with dynamic versions of the N-mixture, site occupancy and zero-augmented beta (ZABE) regression models using simulated data with replicated surveys. More specifically, we used the N-mixture model as parameterized in chapter 2, section 3 of Kéry & Royle (2020), the dynamic occupancy (dynocc) model of Mackenzie et al. (2003) as described in Kéry and Royle (2020) chapter 4 section 6. For the zero-augmented beta regression, we translated the Stan model “model_zabe2.stan” provided by Wright et al. (2017) into JAGS code. We made a few modifications to the original models in order to make them more comparable to our real sampling and also able to estimate a population growth process, rather than discrete annual estimates of abundance. First, we included a plot or quadrat random effect in the N-mixture and occupancy models. The N-mixture and ZABE models were also modified to take into account stochastic growth rates that linked abundances across years, but with annual variance in the growth rates, rather than assuming a constant growth through time as they were originally parameterized. We parameterized the N-mixture model to assume a constant detection probability, rather than a different one for each year and plot, to avoid model overfitting. Finally, we simplified the original ZABE model to not allow total zeros in true abundances in each sampled subplot, as this either doesn’t influence the growth process if these areas are always zero, or greatly complicates the estimation of any growth process if immigration is modeled to allow zero abundance subplots to become occupied.

### Log model
### Dynamic N-mixture model for counts
### Dynamic occupancy model
### Dynamic Zero-Augmented Beta Regression with Error (ZABE) 

## References
MacKenzie, D. I., Nichols, J. D., Lachman, G. B., Droege, S., Andrew Royle, J., & Langtimm, C. A. (2002). Estimating site occupancy rates when detection probabilities are less than one. Ecology, 83(8), 2248-2255. https://doi.org/10.1890/0012-9658(2002)083[2248:ESORWD]2.0.CO;2

Royle, J. A. (2004). N ‐Mixture Models for Estimating Population Size from Spatially Replicated Counts. Biometrics, 60(1), 108-115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0006-341X.2004.00142.x

Wright, W. J., Irvine, K. M., Warren, J. M., & Barnett, J. K. (2017). Statistical design and analysis for plant cover studies with multiple sources of observation errors. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 8(12), 1832-1841. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12825
